@node    GDB remote debugging
@chapter GDB remote debugging interface

@code{GDB} remote debugging interface allows you to use @code{GDB}
debugging facilities with a process (e.g., @code{buenos}) run inside
@code{YAMS} simulator. The @code{GDB} interface is partly an alternative
to the @code{YAMS} command console. @xref{Command Console}.

@cindex GDB, remote debugging

@menu
* Setup::         Setting up the cross-platform GDB
* Starting::      Starting the remote debugging in @code{YAMS}
* Using::         Using the debugger
* Shortcomings::  What can be done and what cannot be done?
@end menu

@node Setup
@section Setup

First, obtain the @code{GDB} source code. The official home page is
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/}. We have tested @code{GDB}
version 7.2. After fetching the source code and unpacking you have to
compile @code{GDB} with the target @code{mips-elf}:

@example
$ tar zxvf gdb-7.2.tar.gz
$ cd gdb-7.2
$ ./configure --target=mips-elf --prefix=/path/to/your/target/dir
$ make
$ make install
@end example

If the compilation and installation was successful, there should be a
@code{mips-elf-gdb} binary in your prefix/bin directory.

@node Starting
@section Starting

The GDB remote debugging interface is executed by giving a command line
switch to yams once the binary is started. The remote debugging is
enabled by starting @code{yams} binary with the switch --gdb @var{port},
where @var{port} is the tcp port where yams listens to tcp connections
from @code{GDB}. After this you have to start the @code{mips-elf-gdb}
and setup the connection. For example, here is how you would start the
debugging session with @code{buenos} and @code{yams} listening in tcp
port 1500 for remote @code{GDB} connections.

@example
$ cd buenos
$ yams --gdb 1500 buenos testconsole
YAMS - Yet Another Machine Simulator 1.3.0

Copyright (C) 2002-2006 Juha Aatrokoski, Timo Lilja, Leena Salmela,
  Teemu Takanen, Aleksi Virtanen

Yams comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; This is free software,
and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions;
see the file COPYING for details.

Starting on a little endian host.
Simulating big endian machine.
Reading configuration from
'/home/tlilja/work/buenos/buenos/buenos/yams.conf'
Connecting to TTY at Unix Domain Socket 'tty0.socket'
TTY connection established
gdb interface listening on port 1500
@end example

The last line from @code{YAMS} indicates that the simulation is stopped
and the gdb interface is listening on tcp port 1500. Now we can start
the gdb with buenos binary as its argument. We have to give gdb the
command @code{target remote:port} so that the gdb can contact
@code{yams}.

@example
$ cd buenos
$ mips-elf-gdb buenos
GNU gdb 6.4
Copyright 2005 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
GDB is free software, covered by the GNU General Public License, ...
[...]
This GDB was configured as "--host=i686-pc-linux-gnu --target=mips-elf"...
(gdb) target remote localhost:1500
Remote debugging using localhost:1500
0x80010004 in _start () at init/_boot.S:47
47              _FETCH_CPU_NUM(t0)
@end example

From the last line you can see that the @code{YAMS} simulator has been
interrupted when the kernel was in the @code{_start}.
See the next section for more examples on how to use the gdb interface.
@xref{Using}.

@node Using
@section Using

Refer to the GDB manual for details on using the debugger. Here we give
brief overview of few of the features available.

Yams supports number of concurrent CPUS that are mapped to threads
in GDB, you can acess them with @code{info threads} command, the active
thread is marked with '*':
@example
(gdb) info threads
  4 Thread 4  0x80010004 in _start () at init/_boot.S:47
  3 Thread 3  0x80010004 in _start () at init/_boot.S:47
  2 Thread 2  0x80010004 in _start () at init/_boot.S:47
* 1 Thread 1  0x80010004 in _start () at init/_boot.S:47
@end example

You can switch active CPU with @code{thread} command and show the
contents of the registers with @code{info} command:
@example
(gdb) thread 2
[...]
(gdb) info registers
          zero       at       v0       v1       a0       a1       a2       a3
 R0   00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 
[...]
@end example

To show the source code, use the @code{list} command:
@example
(gdb) l
2              .ent    _start
43
44      _start:
45              # If we are running on another CPU than 0, wait until CPU 0
46              # has initialized the system
47              _FETCH_CPU_NUM(t0)
48              bnez    t0, init_wait_loop
49
50              # Only CPU 0 runs these
51              li      sp, 0x8000fffc    # Initialize SP
@end example

To set a hardware breakpoint and continue execution until the breakpoint
is hit use @code{hbreak} and @code{continue} commands (Note that only a
single HW breakpoint are currently supported):
@example
(gdb) hbreak scheduler_schedule
Hardware assisted breakpoint 1 at 0x80012400: file kernel/scheduler.c, line 192.
(gdb) cont
Continuing.
Can't send signals to this remote system.  SIGHUP not sent.

Program received signal SIGTRAP, Trace/breakpoint trap.
0x80011624 in interrupt_handle (cause=16384) at kernel/interrupt.c:171
171             if (interrupt_handlers[i].device == NULL)
@end example
The GDB reports only the active CPU's position when the breakpoint is
hit, use @code{info threads} to verify that they are actually in
@code{scheduler_schedule}.

To examine a variables value, use the @code{print} command:
@example
(gdb) p  thread_table
$1 = @{@{context = 0x0, user_context = 0x0, state = THREAD_FREE, sleeps_on = 0,
    pagetable = 0x0, process_id = 0, next = 0, dummy_alignment_fill = @{0, 0,
      0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0@}@} <repeats 32 times>@}
@end example

To kill the simulation:
@example
(gdb) kill
Kill the program being debugged? (y or n) y
@end example
This will also exit @code{yams} simulation.


@node Shortcomings
@section Shortcomings

@itemize @bullet
@item Signals and exceptions (e.g. division by zero exception)  are not
caught or reported to the gdb interface
@item Only single hardware breakpoint is supported due to the
limitations of yams
@itemize @bullet
@item since signals cannot be reported to the GDB there is no way to
support software breakpoits or data watch points
@end itemize
@item There is no access for the MIPS CP0, use @code{yams} hardware
console for that
@item CTRL-C does not work in YAMS console if GDB interface is run but
you can use CTRL-C or break signal in GDB to stop the simulation and
trap the control to the GDB
@item Buenos should be compiled with -O0 flag or the optimizations will
clobber GDB's source display
@item Single-stepping via @code{step} or @code{next} commands are not working
@item GDB @code{detach} is not supported
@end itemize
