.\" For Emacs: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Juha Aatrokoski, Timo Lilja, Leena Salmela, 
.\"   Teemu Takanen, Aleksi Virtanen
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\" 
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.\"
.TH YAMST 1 "yamst version 1.3.0" "Buenos Team" "YAMST MANUAL"
.SH NAME
yamst \- YAMS Terminal Tool

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yamst
[-u] [-i] [-l] [hostname/socketfile] [port]
.br
.B yamst
-l localport
.br
.B yamst
-l socketfile
.br
.B yamst
hostname port
.br
.B yamst
localport
.br
.B yamst
socketfile

.SH EXAMPLES
.B yamst
-lu s0
.br
.B yamst
-li 10000
.br
.B yamst
-i host.domain.tld 10000
.br
.B yamst
-u s0

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents
.B yamst
version 1.0.0
.PP
.B yamst
is a terminal tool for YAMS. YAMS terminals are stream sockets, either
Unix domain or TCP, either listening for a connection or making one.
.B yamst
can connect to a Unix or a TCP socket, and it can also listen for a
connection on both type of sockets. Once the connection is made,
everything typed on the keyboard will be passed to YAMS, and
everything YAMS outputs to the terminal will be written on the
screen.
.PP
The keyboard input is passed unbuffered and "unmodified", which mostly
means that e.g. pressing the enter key will yield the key code 13, or '\\r'. 
Special keypresses (modifiers such as shift, control etc.) are
NOT passed.
.PP
One can also use
.B telnet
as a terminal tool when the YAMS terminal is of listening TCP
type. However, telnet's default mode is line buffered, enter yields
the "\\r\\n" pair and local echo is on.
.PP
The preferred way is making YAMS terminals outbound domain sockets,
ie.
.B yamst
is listeing on a domain socket to which YAMS connects to at
startup.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -u
Specify that Unix domain socket should be used.
.IP -i
Specify that inet (TCP) socket should be used.
.IP -l
Listen to the socket instead of connecting to it.
.IP hostname
The host to which outbound inet connections are made.
.IP socketfile
The socket file to use when domain socket is specified.
.IP port
The port which the inet connection should be made to, or the port to
listen if -l is specified.
.PP
If -u or -i is omitted, yamst will try to guess the desired operation
mode as follows.
.PP
If -l is specified and there is one nonswitch argument, the argument
will be interpreted as a TCP port if it is an integer in the range
1..65535 and yamst will try to listen to the specified port. If that
fails, the argument is interpreted as the name of a domain socket and
yamst will try to listen to it instead.
.PP
If -l is not specified and there are two arguments, they will be
interpreted as hostname and port respectively and an inet connection
will be made.
.PP
If -l is not specified and there is one argument, again the argument
will be interpreted as a TCP port if it is an integer in the range
1..65535 and yamst will try to connect to the specified port at
.B localhost .
If that fails, the argument is interpreted as the name of a domain
socket and yamst will try to connect to it.

.SH CONSOLE
By entering the escape key '^]'
.B yamst
enters the control console. When in the console the following commands
can be entered. Entering an empty command will continue normal
operation.
.IP cr
Change to CR mode. In this mode, which is the default, when a CR is
typed, it will be sent as is to YAMS.
.IP nl
Change to NL mode. In this mode, when a CR is typed, it will be sent
to YAMS as a NL.
.IP quit
Exit
.B yamst .
Hitting CTRL-C also works, and it also works when in a "wait
state" (prompt prefixed by ">>>").

.SH
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR yams (1)
.BR telnet (1)

.SH COPYRIGHT
.B yamst
\- YAMS Terminal Tool
.br
Copyright (C) 2002 Juha Aatrokoski, Timo Lilja,
.br  
  Leena Salmela, Teemu Takanen, Aleksi Virtanen
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.PP
